 I think that what historians will look back and think that the two worst mistakes that they made strategically and tactically were that Joe Biden ran again. And I am embarrassed to say a lot of media commentators. We're looking at these aggregate data and writing various versions to the point why are these people too stupid to understand how good they have it. I think Elon Musk has said in interviews that he expects to be able to cut 2 trillion out of the US budget on an annual basis. So what I'm about to say you'll potentially get angry emails from listeners to this podcast. Hello and welcome to the Institute of Economic Affairs podcast. I'm Tom Plockety, Executive Director here at the IAA and I'm joined this week. By one of my colleagues, our new director of communications, Callum Price, making his podcast debut. Also with us this week, a special guest from the Wall Street Journal. Joseph Sternberg is their political economy columnist and a member of the editorial board. As always, our goal is to bring you a current affairs podcast with a difference. We want to go beyond the headlines and the shallow political commentary you may hear elsewhere, not the Wall Street Journal, of course, and instead focus on the big ideas and foundational principles that matter to classical liberals. This week we're going to talk about Kemi-Badenock's election as Conservative Party leader. Shadow Cabinet and what if anything it means for the future of free markets in Britain? But first, we're going to do a deep dive into the economic and public policy implications of Donald Trump's election as US President. Joe, let's come to you with this first. Donald Trump won a much more resounding and decisive victory in the US presidential election this week than I think most people were expecting. Why do you think that happened? Well, I think the key thing to understand about this election is that it's a lot less surprising than we think it is. American elections are often decided on the basis of the economy. I mean, the classic question in American politics is, are you better off than you were four years ago? And so I think that if we separate out the Trump factor for a minute, yes, it is possible to separate out the Trump factor. And kind of think about the fundamentals of this election. We were coming into this election year in a situation where we've had the worst inflation than 40 years. Real wages, people's earnings, their sense of how good they are feeling about their ability to get by, to not caught up to the inflation. So I think that there was a lot of discontent about that. And that was always going to be a tough road to hoe for any incumbent party. So I think that you would have started out with your default assumption being that the Democrats were going to face an uphill battle. And then on top of that, you were going to have the immigration issue because I think that there was a growing sense that there was King Oslo and the southern border. We have seen across democratic countries, especially here in Europe, how vexing that is, how voters really expect the government to get a grip on that. That's I think the fact that the crisis that developed during the Biden-Heroes administration was always going to create a challenge, you know, pursuing people to vote for the incumbent party again. And then you had various cultural issues always find their way into the phrase. So what's interesting about this election, I mean, if we really want to, we can talk about that. But what was kind of unusual is that you heard a swirl of different cultural issues that kind of cut across the grain in unconventional ways. So the Democrats wanted to run an election that was going to be based on abortion policy. That seemed not to work as well. I think the Republicans wanted to run a campaign that was going to focus a lot on transgender issues, particularly involving children in the schools and biological meals competing in girls or women's sports. That does seem to have gotten a bit more purchase, particularly persuading, you know, moderator, independent voters and independent suburban women voters. But you know, I think again, taking a step back from that perspective, it seems like a very normal election. So I think the confounding factor in the reason that we thought that it was going to be so close was Trump, of the fact that his personality and his political method can be so abrasive and off-putting to so many voters. I mean, the real counterfactual here is what would have happened if the Republicans had nominated anyone else. And you can make a good argument that in that kind of situation, the fundamentals would have pointed to an even wider margin of victory for the Republican. Now, I mean, you can't assume that would have been a very different kind of election. We'll never know how that would have played out. But I mean, you can either say that you're surprised that Trump won by the margin that he did given his Trump. Or you can say that you're surprised that he didn't win by a bigger margin because of the fundamentals of the campaign season, especially on the economy. Yeah, I mean, I think that's fascinating. It seems to me that in a way, this feels like a different Trump election victory than his last one. I think last time around, it did seem very much like something out of the blue. It was a kind of different type of Republican party, different type of conservatives. It was all about kind of him and his, you know, the kind of realignment in American politics. It was very much seemed like a kind of national populist victory. Now Trump himself hasn't changed. But this, and maybe it's just me not paying close enough attention, this feels a little bit different. In a way, this seems more conventional because, as you say, the economy was so central. And in a way, you know, leave aside all the stuff about Haitians eating cats or whatever. Is this ultimately a fairly traditional conservative message on economics, maybe with a few twists, which we're going to come on and talk about in a minute, those cut through and as resonated with Vose's? I think that's a really subtle but very important point because I think you're right that this election does feel very differently from 2016. And I think that a key factor is that people had a much keener sense that the economy was not working for them this time around than they did eight years ago. So I think in 2016, it did end up being much more of a culture election. And not in the sense that we ordinarily think of hot button, you know, issues like abortion or transgender issues this time around, but it was much more about the deeper political culture in America. And whether you had a governing class that really had respect for the electorate and particularly for blue collar workers who felt like they had been left behind in the preceding couple decades. And interestingly, that might explain why that election was so close. I think that America is such a complicated society with so many of these different cross-cutting divisions and cleavages, but then also a lot of ways in which Americans manage to get along with each other across those divides. I think that many times it has been very difficult to run that kind of a culture kind of thing. So it was a lot easier for Trump this time around because he could focus on the economy, which is an issue where people will have a much clearer sense of, I either feel like I'm doing okay or I feel like I'm not doing okay and there tends to not be vast middle ground in terms of people's own. You won't get a lot of voters who will go into the voting booth saying, yeah, I think I'm kind of okay and kind of not okay and I'm right. People will put themselves in one camp or the other and that will influence their voting behavior and that's what seems to happen this time around. I guess it's also an interesting point that when people aren't feeling as okay, that perpetuates things that will also probably point them in the direction of the right-wing party. So on immigration, people often feel that much more coutially in a negative sense if they're not feeling that the economy is going for them, what things are going in their direction and then the same as true of crime, I would say as well, that if they're generally feeling like they're not doing that well and they're feeling that other people are by illicit means, then those things will push them. Maybe it's in the direction of the right-wing party, maybe it's just as we saw in Britain this year, the direction of the non-incumente party. I think there's a lot to that and I think that part of it probably has to do more with non-incumency than it does with right versus left because if you feel like whatever is happening right now isn't working for you, you just want to vote the bums out. So I think that that worked against the Democrats this time around because they were the incumbent party and it particularly hurt them or rather they hurt themselves because they missed the one big opportunity that they would have had to try to neutralize that in-convencie. I think that historians will look back and think that the two worst mistakes that they made strategically and tactically were the Joe Biden ran again instead of saying, I did what I was elected to do by defeating Trump in 2020. My work here is done. It's time for the next generation. Then you could have had an open primary that would have allowed, for example, some of these Democratic governors from the state level who wouldn't have been tarnished by some of the unpopular Biden administration policies at the national level and then they compounded that error when he did run again and when he dropped out essentially at the last minute and then they replaced him with the one Democrat who would have exactly zero chance of running away from that in-convencie. Am I right in saying she didn't particularly try very hard to, she had maybe opportunity to say actually I did disagree with XYZ policy but then that didn't take those opportunities and it was pushed far right. One of the weird things about this election season is that there were a bunch of really really big freight trains that were barreling down the tracks at the Democrats that they could see in here for miles and miles away and yet when the locomotive came round the bend they just lay down on the tracks. So I think that some of these freight trains are this incumbency issue. Biden's age and mental acuity was something that I mean it was obviously going to become a problem at some point and yet they seem so startled when it did suddenly burst into the general consciousness. If they were going to nominate Kamala Harris the obvious question that she was going to have to face if in the economy was exactly what you raised, what are you going to do differently? She seemed surprised when it popped up and then weirdly it happened the first time and then she kept getting versions of that question and never managed to develop an answer to it. I want to get on to some policy specifics to the extent that we have policy specifics about the incoming Trump administration but maybe one more general question before we go to that. I'm kind of struck by this talk about American voters feeling kind of down about the state of the US economy and voting accordingly because we talk so much in this country about why aren't we doing as well as America? Look at their growth rates, look at all the innovation, look at their massive world-beating companies. Yes, I spent time in America and I lived in America for a while. It's very obvious when you go to the US and go to a grocery store, things are just so much more expensive than they used to be and it really is quite striking in a way that now I don't know whether it's just because I've been living in the UK and so the inflation has crept up on me here, kind of boiling a frog slowly. It doesn't have that same kind of sticker shock. In America, it really does but I also wonder if maybe the inflation just showed up much more acutely in things that people buy as staples in America and maybe it has that made the difference somehow. But I guess the real question here is why don't Americans feel better about their economy? When everyone else is looking up to America and saying can we have some of that please? Again, this is a crucial political economy point and anyone who is within range of my voice on this podcast hear me when I say if you're a politician you've got to understand that the economic value is high to you and the data that we tend to talk about about in the media or in the political realm are not the economic factors that matter to voters. So I mean, we're talking about GDP growth which is an aggregate number that captures what's happening across the economy but think about what that doesn't tell you. It doesn't tell you if the growth happening in the private sector, some people who work or private companies are they feeling more secure? They benefiting from this economic growth through as the GDP growth concentrated in this expansion of government. Did you and your home already have a mortgage which in America the interest rate is fixed for the full 30 year term or were you trying to get on to the property platter and you were hit by this double whammy of property prices that have not deflated at all but also now higher mortgage rates or do you have money in a retirement account or invested in stocks which have performed quite well or are you largely dependent on wage income from paper which has not caught up with the price level after the inflation. So I think that what was becoming really puzzling and did actually become a political culture issue in this election is this phenomenon where you had a lot of economists on the left and a lot of politicians on the left and I am embarrassed to say a lot of media commentators although on the left and unlike myself. We were looking at these aggregate data writing various versions of the point why are these people too stupid to understand how good they have it. When actually you need to work the around from the other way if the signal that you are getting from the opinion polls and voter behaviors that people are unhappy with the state of the economy you need to dig deeper into whatever data you have in order to understand why and you'll generally discover that there is a reset. So I think anyone who is claiming that they are surprised by this result because the GDP growth was so good. I mean that's the opinion polls were telling us it was going to be close and if the economy were really as good in people's perception as the data claimed that it was that wouldn't have been the case. I guess they fell into the older Harold Macmillan. The people have never had it so good trap. If people don't feel that way you might end up being punished for it. So ironically let's move on to talk about some Trump policies. We talked about inflation. We talked about the cost of living. The one thing we really know about Donald Trump is that he likes tariffs. He's proposed a kind of 10% tariff on all imports and a 60% plus tariff on any Chinese imports. This I think I've read is equivalent to like a $50 billion 80 billion dollar tax increase on American consumers. So what's going on there? So you run into this problem that Peter Keel encapsulated years ago when he said that the issue is do you take Trump literally or seriously? So in the literally sense it is true that he has in his circle a bunch of people who believe very passionately in tariffs and a protectionist economic policy and who huge very closely to this theory the America's industrial base has hollowed out as a result of this competition from the cheap imports and so what you really need to do to deliver for his blue collar voters is protect them from that so that you can foster the development of domestic industry. There are people who will come into the administration and fill senior positions within the administration who believe that. Now the great unannounced whether Trump actually believes that and no one can tell I mean the optimistic argument if you really want to be hopeful about the tariff issue is to think back to a previous Trump campaign promise from 2016 which was building the wall. Right. And what happened in that campaign is that the wall wasn't really about the wall. Build the wall became a shorthand on the you know stump politically for I am going to get a control of illegal immigration. We're not going to have all of the illegals coming in anymore. And so the wall was kind of the pneumonic device. In fact I think that was that was how he first started using it. Someone slipped it into his speech and sort of like an easy to remember promise he could make to signal to people that he was serious about illegal immigration. So we got to 2020 and the wall had not been built except for small parts of it and his supporters didn't care because he had gotten control more so than previous administrations had done on illegal immigration. So if that ends up being the model here I think that what we could hope is that what's going on with the tariffs is that he has adopted the tariff as a simple pneumonic device to signal to these blue color voters that he is serious about dealing with their problems and making sure that America is a country where you can open factories and create high paid skilled blue collar work that it isn't all going to be about forcing people to go to get a four-year university degree somewhere and then work work in an office that there is going to be employment for everyone and he is serious about economic policies that do that and if that's what he means by it it could be that he actually loses enthusiasm for the tariff as people start pointing out to him what the economic consequences would be or he becomes very transactional about them. I think that there are also people who might be coming into the administration who have thought that the tariff is really negotiating tactic that he wants is greater access for American exports to EU or UK markets or greater access for American investors into China which has been a long-standing complaint for a lot of American businesses and that he's using the threat of the tariffs in order to try to leave other people and to deliver that and yeah it is that an ideal strategy economically or diplomatically probably not but it does raise the prospect that we might end up without having all of these tariffs if trading partners are prepared to transact with him. Yeah I suppose it's tempting to hew on the optimistic side of that one and say he doesn't really mean it or he's not actually going to do it because of course tariffs on that scale would have a pretty enormous impact globally on the economy. America probably is big enough and dynamic enough that they can avoid the worst effects. Consumers will be hit but how much people notice is unclear. I think for the rest of the world especially if it triggers a kind of tip for tap you could see globalization which we've benefited from so enormously around the world starting to unravel. I think one of the issues that you run into with Trump is always it's a question of who is the last person who spoke to him. Right. That's out something. And so what we have to hope for is that the last people who talk to him about these issues are people who are going to explain to him how the tariffs would be bad for precisely the people who voted for him and how they ultimately are bad for the US economy. I think if someone can manage to get that into his ear in the 30 seconds before he goes out to make an announcement about whatever the policy is going to be. I think that the political argument then becomes he has one mandate and it isn't the tear-offs. That mandate is that he has got increased inflation-adjusted labor income. He has got to reverse this phenomenon that we saw during the Biden Harris administration of real wages falling behind. And we've got to reverse the situation where anyone's sense of well-being to the extent that people in the economy had it is based on asset ownership. So I think if someone can find a way if it's possible to persuade him on this I don't know if it is how persuadable he is. Maybe this is the one thing that he truly passionately believes. But I would hope that eventually political reality is going to assert itself. And even if it doesn't in the Trump administration a consequence of the fact that this policy will not be beneficial economically is that the voters are going to punish Republicans in future elections. In the same way that they've just punished the Democrats. And that raises the hope that Republicans will not fully go online to this protectionist policy. And what do you think Joe about Trump's broader economic agenda? He's broader policy agenda. I mean we're going to see presumably the tax cuts from the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act which were due to expire I think in 2025, 2026. They presumably will be extended which is in a way great news because that was a very good overall tax reform package. The downside of course is I think it adds about four trillion to the US deficits over a 10 year period. Now on the other hand some of Trump's pledges during the campaign on tax really kind of wacky things like no tax on tips, no tax on overtime, no tax on social security benefits really kind of doling out the cheap lines for the rallies and stuff but not sensible tax policy making at all. I guess maybe this is another case where are you taking it seriously or literally? Seriously means the guy wants to cut taxes literally means these specific ones. And of course there's also debate that Trump really wants to restore the salt, state and local tax credit which for people who don't know listening is effectively you used to be allowed to deduct your state and local tax bills from your federal tax bill in the US which is effectively a subsidy to high tax states like New York's and New Jersey's and California's and so on. Because it means wealthy taxpayers that don't feel the pinch from the state local taxes as much as they would otherwise. Maybe the interesting flip side of this tax question where the indication is lower taxes much bigger deficits is spending and it's something I'm really interested in actually and it's probably because of the presence in this in this all bit of Elon Musk and the suggestion that he will be some sort of secretary for cuts or government efficiencies are or whatever. I think Elon Musk has said in interviews that he expects to be able to cut two trillion out of the US budget on an annual basis which is about one third of public spending. Now for people who favor smaller government that sounds like music to our ears but do you think that's possible? Are either of these things possible the tax cuts or the spending cuts? Well let's start talking about the tax issue because I think this is a good microcosm or maybe we should call it a macrocosm of the conflicting impulses that we're going to see playing out in the Trump administration. So I think that one of the best things that he can do for the economy as you pointed out is to extend the 2017 tax reform and the reason that that tax reform was so effective is that it was a classic supply side tax reform of the sort the Reagan or Patcher would have recognized. It was built in such a way that it was focused on improving the incentives in the economy to work and to save and to invest so that you could stimulate more production in the economy and not just more demand. And I think the you know the signs of success are things like you had a period of surprisingly low unemployment but no inflation which conventionally a lot of economists had and thought would be possible but supply side is always thought something that you can aspire to. And the fact that within specific demographic groups who have often been left behind in the US particularly black man the unemployment picture was very strong in that era and it was a result of these incentives. And so extending that you make sure making sure that you have those good incentives for saving and investment and work is part of that. And in fact some of these quirkier gimmicks he's been talking about are kind of consistent with that. So I mean if you think about the practical effect of a tax exemption on tips for example it stimulates it rewards work and particularly rewards blue collar work which is a demographic that he's going for and who otherwise have been hit by a bunch of democratic induced increases in minimum wages which negative effects on employment. But against that you have this temptation for gimmickry. So I mean some of the other tax things he proposes like the you know not taxing the social security benefits which is our old age pension. There's no particular rationale for that. And even for some of these things like the promise to eliminate taxes on tips or over time if he does that even though kind of conceptually it's a supply side cut in the for you know in the sense that it rewards work rather than things like the child tax credit which are just using the tax code as a way of laundering stimulus for consumption. You know you have this problem that there are costs associated with that. It is true that the congressional budget office which is our equivalent of the office for budget responsibility year, habitually over states the fiscal costs of tax cuts. And so there will immediately be this issue for any given tax reform whether or not it is consistent with the supply side ethos in general is this the best supply side tax reform that we can do given some of the fiscal constraints that we have. That's I think that you're going to have these impulses and one thing that's going to make it very difficult intellectually and politically. The 2017 tax reform happened because when he came into office he rode in with a characteristically in the conferee and confused policy agenda. But he inherited a Republican caucus in Congress and particularly in the House of Representatives with people like Paul Ryan and a lot of the experience hands on the ways and means committee which writes tax policy who had been thinking seriously about these issues for a long time. And so Trump was basically able to co-opt that intellectual framework or those thinkers were able to co-opt him. And they had this package of supply side reforms that was essentially of and ready. We don't have that now. I think one of Trump's negative influences on the Republican party is that he has managed to chase away a lot of that kind of Republican. And so I think that we're going to come into the second term without a lot of that intellectual boundless. And that's why you should worry, you know, despite the rosy scenario I laid out a couple minutes ago, the arguments like the tariffs won't necessarily go very well because you will at some point have to ask who is in Washington is going to make this argument. I think personally the big problem with those kind of targeted tax cuts, although as you say they do encourage work and so on, is that they're not remotely neutral in the way they do that. They would encourage employees to kind of structure contracts differently. Obviously if you're not taxing tips or over time, well, you want to cut hours and you want to cut base wages and then try and shift your income somewhere else. And I think those things can be problematic. But I'm eager to get your view on this spending issue because this will be far from the first administration to come into government in America or anywhere else in the world saying we can make massive savings. There's lots of waste to cut. We can be super efficient. And look, you know, you have seen Elon Musk when he took over Twitter. I mean, he let go what 80% of the staff. And I know a lot of people say Twitter is a lot worse than it used to be. I never cared for it very much in the first place, frankly. But it is still functional. Still a successful business, etc, etc. Can you do that kind of thing in government? Can you do that kind of thing in Washington with the federal bureaucracy? Probably not. Yeah. On the spending, this is going to be a big problem. And it's going to be a problem in a couple of dimensions first off because I think you can make a good argument that one of the root causes of the inflation and one of the reasons that the inflation is continued to be persistently above the 2% target the federal reserve was aiming for is all of the spending that happened under the Biden administration. And it's important to understand that that has not actually stopped. I mean, the way that these bills, whether it was the one trillion plus of COVID stimulus or the one trillion plus other stimulus or the one trillion plus infrastructure bill or the chips act or any of the rest of it. What happens is there's a debating Washington about those bill and the media pays an awful lot of attention to it. And then it either passes or doesn't pass and it gets signed by the president or it doesn't get signed. And then everyone totally loses interest in it except that those bills are actually organized as multi-year spending programs. So by design, the spending trickles out over the course of the US. It's just a really 10-year budget window. And so spending is right as we speak happening under the EGIS of a lot of these bills the past three or four years ago. And that is money that is pouring into the economy and creating a lot of the inflationary consequences that we were still, you know, proved so politically difficult for the Democrats. And so I think that one easy thing for the incoming Trump administration to deal, especially since so many of those bills were so unpopular politically anyway, is to say we're going to stop. We're just not going to spend whatever remains in the budget envelopes from those bills. And particularly something like the magnificently misnamed inflation reduction act, which is probably one of the most inflationary pieces of fiscal legislation that America has ever seen because it is so politically toxic. And because voters do seem to understand that it caused inflation, you can make a good argument that we just are not going to do this anymore enough as enough. And it will help with the exception of Elon Musk, of his, you know, green businesses, the benefit sharies of this, of the lawyers, us have been, you know, green industries who were not friends with the Republicans anyway. Yeah. And, you know, that actually is an example of how if you can get spending under control, it has all of these positive knock on effects because imagine an economy where we're not only are we not spending this money, the government doesn't have. But we aren't spending it to prop up industries in a very distorting way, which are creating all of these knock on problems with an economy. Imagine what happens if we're no longer subsidizing electric vehicles that people don't want to drive anyway. And, you know, we're no longer subsidizing the installation of windmills and solar energy that are capable of powering in advanced industrial economy. And instead, then the thing that you have to do is more shale gas fracking and all of a sudden you have a cheap energy supply that might, you know, in some ways be better for the economy because we're also not then dependent on dirty minds in China for whole of the rare earths. Yeah. I think the interesting thing with government efficiency and spending cuts from a political perspective is that you can, government efficiency is always the first place that the sort of election manifestos go to, define savings for their spending pledges or their tax cuts. And it's often in the UK at least, we will sort of we'll do an efficiency review, we'll trim the fat of the civil service, we'll put a cap on civil service hiring, etc., etc. But the real question is, as you've alluded to, is actually what you really need to find the savings come from stopping doing things, not just doing everything you were doing, but somehow more efficiently. But actually one of these things that you can literally stop spending money on and that will appeal to the electorate. And again, you know, talking about spending, we also have to understick and that Trump has promised to do exactly zero about one of the biggest drivers of America's fiscal problems, which is entitlement. The quirk of America is the Medicaid spending is split between the federal government and the states. So it looks in the many states have Republican governors or legislatures, you will find a certain amount of political sympathy for the idea of scaling back on the eligibility. Now that leads, leaves the old age benefits, which are the real problem. And I think that it's very difficult to see how America gets a grip once in for all on our fiscal deficit, let alone the debt. If we can't put social security and Medicare on a more sustainable footing. And you know, there's an interesting question of how you do that, because there was a window 20 years ago when you could have switched to a system that was built around private retirement accounts. I haven't looked at this in detail. My sense is that becomes more difficult now that we have waited until the moment when a lot of the baby boomers are starting to retire, because I think that just as a matter of political reality and also, you know, to a certain extent, justice, you can't pull the rug out from people after they have retired. So I think that one of the fiscal problems that America is going to have is that we missed the opportunity to reform these programs before the baby boom generation was in them. Now that that has happened, you're going to have to accommodate for the fact you have a large segment of the people who built the retirement plan on the idea that these benefits would be there. Yeah, I mean, his is not it. I'm talking about an election pinches on inflation, an immigration, and talking about, you know, real wages not keeping up with prices, talking as you just have. There are a lot of parallels you're talking about, like the the the tidal wave of old age spending that's coming our way and that politicians, policymakers have no idea how to grapple with. These are very common challenges between the UK and the US, aren't they? And America maybe seems to be in a better state because they have bad economic growth because they have such a successful corporate sector. But is that that common analogy there? Maybe it's a good moment to sort of segue and talk about the UK as well. And I think this is much more we could say about Donald Trump, obviously a little bit of speculation at the moment. We're going to have four years to say, which is we want it or not. I take that as a sea voluntary come back and talk to us again about what's going on in America. And one thing we haven't touched on actually is the kind of regulatory implications of Donald Trump. We've talked a lot about the fiscal side of things, you know, soft on the way in these discussions. But I think increasingly regulatory policy plays a huge role in these questions of growth and economic dynamism. And there does seem to be a distinct agenda with Trump there. The question is of course how much that gas translates into actual action. I mean, I think the success on the regulatory front, such as it was under the first Trump administration was largely because he couldn't appoint anybody to any of the regulatory agencies because the Senate wouldn't confirm his appointments. So kind of regulating ground to a halt a little bit. It didn't go into reverse, but it just stalled. Well, the short answer to that is that we don't know. De-regulation has always been very difficult because you really have to be able to rust control of these vast, vast bureaucracies, unwillingly away from a civil service that is antagonistic to your goal. If only because they got into that line of work because they wanted to engage in regulation and now there are new boss who they don't like and didn't work for is going to tell them not to do it. So I think the, you know, an interesting way we did already touch on the deregulation in our conversation without realizing that we were doing it because it is going to end up being inextricably linked with things like the Elon Musk efficiency drive and whether that has implications for the government head count. I think that the conservatives have tried time and time again and man have they tried to deal with deregulation by telling these bureaucrats to sit on their hands and not do things. And I mean, it sounds counterintuitive to say that these bureaucrats apparently don't enjoy being idle because they will not follow that instruction. So now if it, if this is a big if, if it turns out we're going to follow a business model where we are just going to have fewer bureaucrats because we're slits on lining the government, then you're going to deregulate because you will have fewer people available to write the regulations. So you deregulate by limiting the total number of man hours each year that the government is able to devote to that. Or well, as promised, let's turn to the UK briefly and then maybe we can bring these two themes, US UK back together and think a little bit about what does this mean for right of said to politics. But Calum probably start with a slight declaration of interest for you and I pose you this question. You're at the eye now, you're our director of communications, you're strictly nonpartisan. You do have a history though, you worked for the Conservatives in government, you're in the Ministry of Justice, as a special advisor in the home office. Having said that, give us your take, Kenny Bade-Knock, elected leader of the Conservative Party, appointed a shadow cabinet. Do you think there are any early signs of the direction that she and the party are likely to take in the UK? Kenny Bade-Knock has done something quite impressive and that she's got through a very long conservative leadership contest without really committing any policy whatsoever, which is a challenging thing to do. Her whole sort of basis was that she was going to take a principles first approach and those principles are sort of largely conservative with a small and big C, I would say. Personal responsibility, citizenship, family, those things were all mentioned. But I think one of the most interesting things and potentially where there's optimism for classical liberals is in her dedication to drive for truth. She keeps saying it's time to tell the truth, it's time to be honest with the British people. I think that that is potentially a sign of good things to come if you are, if you are of the sort of pro-free market, classical liberal side, because a lot of the things that we believe in, you know, in non-excessive government spending and cuts where they need to be made and letting the market do rather work are quite difficult things to sell sometimes. But if you have a leader who's really dedicated to sort of telling the truth and making sure that those clear choices are delivered and communicated to the public, then they may be ground there for what going in that sort of direction. But ultimately the principles that she set out are fine, that sort of small, significant principles, as I've mentioned, but they leave a lot of wiggle room. She's appointed her shallow carbonate this week, which doesn't really give us much more of a hint. The one theme in the shallow carbonate, I would say, is that it's filled with experienced politicians. There's lots of, and sort of geared towards being probably quite an effective opposition if you've got Mel Stride, who's won a big economic department, stunning up against the chance that you've got Pretty Patel, who was International Development Secretary against the front secretary. Chris Filth was, as well as the home office, up against the home secretary. So sort of hard work and experiences at the core of an element of sort of party unity, if you like, as well. There are people who supported Kenny, who didn't, people who are maybe from the one nation side of the party, or the other maybe the more right wing of the party. So it doesn't really, the appointment of the carbonate doesn't really, the shallow carbonate doesn't really give us a great sense of direction. But what it does suggest, I think, is that she's putting this renewal message, she's taken this renewal thing very seriously. It's not like she suddenly won the election, and now she's just going to do what she wants. She's trying to take as many people with her, and that will be the defining feature of whether she is successful in her wanting to be very radical, and to rewire the state she talks about. Can she do that? Can she bring the party with her? Because the other forces that she's up against are, is the conservative parties, Ponschant for winning elections, and five years isn't very long. Before the next general election, that'll be the maximum. The first election hits in May 23 when there's local elections, and she will start to be just quite quickly on how she does and those sorts of things. And will she be buffeted by taking me with easy route, that the latter years of the Conservative government did, I think, so the more the more just do what's popular and not try and take on the hard choice does, or will she really stick to this renewal message in a potentially sort of that right driven way, the ladies not for turning, etc. Will she stick to that? And let's sort of political ease be the sort of forth of the wayside. Yeah, I think that's a really interesting point actually, because I think she said, you know, the first thing I need to do, or we need to do is the shadow cabinet is opposed to government. And the second thing is to make sure that the Conservative party is ready for government in five years time or whatever. And I think implicit in that is that probably since about 2016 when David Cameron went after that Brexit referendum, you've had a succession of Conservative Prime Ministers, none of whom, frankly, were ready to govern. And there was a constant attempt to sort of reinvent oneself in office and come up with a new agenda. And I think frankly with the best will in the world, you can't really say that any of it actually worked, whether it was whether it was May, whether it was Johnson, whether it was Trass or whether it was Sunack, they because they were just sort of coming in in the middle of there was no real ability to kind of get a grip of the state and the agenda and actually kind of drive something forward, rather than just react, yeah, constantly. Now, of course, to say that they're going to do some deep thinking and they're going to come up with some ideas and they're going to have a plan for government, that doesn't necessarily pre-supposed that I will like any of the things that they come up with. Hopefully I will, but you never can tell with politicians, Joe, what do you think? But well, I think that, you know, if you kind of take a step back and we think about what's going on in a global context here, because I think that actually, I mean, we were talking about similarities between the US and the UK in terms of inflation or the immigration or any of the rest of it, but this is actually happening across democracies. I mean, this is exactly the same kind of conversation that we could be having in French if we were sitting in Paris or German if we were sitting in Berlin. And I think that what I think, what's really interesting for our side on the free market side of these debates is that this political environment is creating some risks for our side, but also some enormous opportunities. And I think that the opportunity is that voters seem to be much more free agents than they have been in the past few decades. And what we're discovering in the US, and I think that at times the Tory party has discovered here over the years and what Nigel Farage has definitely discovered for better or worse, is that you can reach now voters who have not historically been part of your coalition and bring them on side if you make the right kind of policy offer. And that isn't just about you as the politician making the offer. It's about the fact that voters have become very frustrated with the status quo and that is causing them to be much more mercenary than they used to be. With a form of cultural policy that understands that people want their country to mean something, they want it to mean something that there are borders around the country. That's why to feel like the government is capable of delivering law and order and just basically enforcing the law in terms of who comes into the country and who doesn't. And that conversation will be more comfortable for some people on the free market right than it will be for others. And there's going to be some push and pull here because I think that if you believe in a relatively liberal, legal immigration regime, you are going to have to work to explain how that is compatible with a government with a country that means something but also with the economic growth that people are demanding. I think that's a really interesting and maybe this will be our closing discussion point. There's a really interesting division. Two different views I think of the future of the right. One of which you've just expressed very nicely which is that you achieve some kind of new fusionism and it's a fusion between, as you say, free market economics and a sort of subnationalism. And that doesn't really look all that different from the old and servitive fusionism of the Cold War era. There are changes in emphasis. There's maybe changes in communication and some of the policies will be different because the times have changed. But fundamentally that's something that we're familiar with and probably comfortable with in many cases as free market is. Now there's an alternative view of the future of the right. And oddly enough, I think you can use, can we be not becoming conservative party leader here? You can use Donald Trump being elected again as US president. You could use those to argue either one of these points of view because a lot of people will say looking at Donald Trump winning. Well, this is another victory for the kind of national populist culture war view. What our colleagues Steve Davies has talked about a lot over the last few years. This coming realignment in Western politics where traditionally the main polarising issue has been economics. And of course, there have been a whole range of different views on the two different sides of politics. But whether you're on the right or the left was largely about how you viewed markets and how you viewed the role of the state. Now his thesis, which does seem to keep being born out by by events around the world, is that it's changing. And the polarising issue is basically culture and identity and kind of the nation. And I think his rather pessimistic view is that once the right and the left polarise around those issues and kind of I guess national sovereignty versus cosmopolitanism on the other hand, the free market is a classical liberal just gets squeezed out because what becomes dominant in economic thinking on the right once you have that as your dominant issue is probably more protectionism, more interventionism. I don't know what the best way to call it is maybe it's a kind of peronism or something as your economic policy. And I think people can look at Trump certainly and say that's the direction of travel. People can say that it can be something very different I think which is that she's a culture warrior first and foremost and that economics are further back in her thinking I don't know whether that's fair I think time will tell. But we've been the point of this conversation I think has been that when you look at Trump and you look at America and you look at what might happen other than the presentation it seems to be it seems like this was an economic selection and that this could be for the most part a relatively conventional conservative government in America on economics. Yes so the thing about the social issues I completely get why that has become the big framing for a lot of these electoral issues and a lot of the electoral upsets that we've heard whether you I mean even going back to 2016 in the Brexit referendum in this country or Trump's first election in America or I think there's a tendency to view a lot of these electoral upsets in Europe through a culture lens and there's a lot of validity to it. The thing that I think about that feels like a trap for conservatives because the thing about social issues is they are much more ephemeral right so in fact funnily enough the Democrats in America discovered that in the cycle so they they're a big social issue was going to be abortion following the Supreme Court ruling a couple of years ago which kicked it back into the democratic sphere and they're discovering that that issue already has a very short half life it was motivating for voters in the first year or two after the dobs ruling from the Supreme Court made it a democratic issue for the first time in a couple generations but the nature of these things is that you settle that so as we've had a bunch of state constitutional amendments that had passed or not passed in referendum and as you've had a couple of election cycles for state legislature and governor over this has been an issue and then the legislature does or does not settle something and then all of a sudden you've parked that issue because you've ended up through the democratic process with an outcome that is moderately acceptable to most voters and all of a sudden there's no profit in it which is why there is no real abortion politics anywhere in Europe because the issue has been settled democratically all along here so there's no longer profit for anyone in poking that pair and yeah the same thing is going to happen to Republicans who feel like they have just won this election of the cultural issue transgender rights or health care that issue will eventually get resolved in some way and then it's parked and it's no longer available to you to campaign on so there might be some of these deeper issues that take a while to work out the sort of national sentiment versus cosmopolitanism that you were talking about or some of the rest of it and some of these will always be cleavages that will always be it will be within a society but the nature of the democratic process as you will eventually deal with whatever that issue is and then you have to move on to whatever the next thing is going to be in the cleavages and that will not necessarily align neatly what endures is the economy so I think that Republicans who get distracted chasing the shiny object of some of these culture issues which will turn out to be a relatively short term will be making a terrible mistake if they lose their bearings on the economy because that's something that the government has to do continuously and it's something where history has shown that voters vote or nothing else it is that basic question of whether you feel better off than you did the last election. Yeah I mean obviously it's the director of an economics think tank I'm delighted by the suggestion that economics will be enduring the importance that politics revolves around and hopefully those of us who believe in free markets can win I said that would be our last thing but I want to ask you one more question actually because you brought up the democratic process and the importance of settling things democratically and we probably ought to touch on this point because as much as we believe in free markets, free people I think we also believe in liberal democracy and the one kind of unforgivable thing that I think Trump has done now you could you can say what you want about the personality and the presentation and some of the stuff in his private life and everything and then you can debate the policy issues one way or another and we've done that I think the election denial last time around seen to me was just an unforgivable error for anyone trying to be a significant figure in democratic politics and I know a lot of friends in America really do worry that Trump is a threat to liberal democracy what's your view on that it do you think there's stuff to be worried about or is this is this overblown so the election denial on 2020 was corrosive to American politics and society and what happened on January 6th of 2021 was disgraceful and I think that on balance it probably should be disqualifying on that's why I was not at all enthusiastic about the idea that Trump was running again but then you have to ask yourself why have so many voters why have a majority of voters decided to endorse a candidate who last time tried to gaslight majority voters many of them potentially the same people into thinking that somehow the result would been other than it was and I think that unfortunately for American political culture you have to look at this in the broader context and I think that the reason that a lot of conservative voters who care passionately about American institutions and democracy would none the less vote for Trump after all of that is because they perceived that there were also a lot of threats to American institutions and democracy coming from the other side and so what I'm about to say you'll potentially get angry emails from listeners to this podcast saying you know Joe is just doing all of this what aboutism but remember another word for what aboutism is hypocrisy and the hypocrisy that Republicans picked up on is Trump's election denoilism in 2020 came after Democrats had been peddling these false Russian collusion theories to try to discredit Trump's victory in 2016 and they came after the Democrats had made a hero of a gubernatorial candidate in Georgia stacey Abrams where I think still has not conceded that she lost an election that happened must be nearly a decade ago now and she you know was appearing on liberal meaning left wing TV all the time as kind of a hero of the cause and you know Trump's election has come after you know the Biden administration broke the longstanding norm of not prosecuting a former political tone at you know even if we thought legally you could have a case you would make the prudential judgment that you shouldn't do that and you know this came after the Democrats I mean part of the election campaign that I think you have to say people were voting against was that the Democrats were not so quietly hinting that they would change the structure of the Supreme Court to expand the number of justices so that they could panic with um you know democratic appointees uh and then I think that one factor that probably swayed some of the Senate braces and handed that chamber to the Republicans was the Democrat promise that they were going to get rid of this filibuster role which a lot of people perceive as a form of banalist and American democracy because it requires the Senate to have a super majority before you passed legislation um so I think if you look at that broader context you can understand Roy a lot of Republicans most of the people I know who ended up voting for Trump were deeply unhappy about the election denial four years ago and the Capitol riots and desperately wanted any other candidate during the primary process and yet you have to choose between the names that are on the ballot in November and one of those was Trump and then the other was the uh tribune for a movement within American politics that wants to make all of these institutional changes I think people decided that a lot of the damage that Trump might do and things like the economy with the tariffs is probably reversible eventually whereas the institutional changes that the Democrats were talking about would not be and would be very damaging to American institutions and democracy so I mean you can believe that argument and agree with it or not but I think that it's important for people to understand that that is what the thinking was that explains this outcome and why of people who take very seriously Americans form of Republican democracy were still prepared to vote for Trump in the end Britain well this has been I think a fascinating conversation Cal thank you for your podcast debut Joe thank you especially to you for uh bringing an extraordinary depth of knowledge that we don't have in this building about American politics and policy to the IAA podcast this week it's been fascinating one of our longest podcasts to date as well maybe people were starting to think that we took a hint from Donald Trump's three-hour marathon with Joe Rogan and we were going to keep rolling but we'll draw it to a close there maybe we'll try a really long one in future some time but anyway thank you everybody for watching and or listening um if you enjoyed this please subscribe to our YouTube channel uh sign up for our substack at insider.io.org.uk and otherwise I look forward to seeing you again soon. Cheers